---
layout: page
title: Programming Languages - Groovy
permalink: /wiki/groovy
tag: programming
---

## Groovy
After coding Java for quite some time, I recently had the refreshing experience of coding in Groovy.  It is fairly easy to transition to Groovy after coding in Java, and best of all compiled Groovy code will run using the same JVM that you use for Java.  

### What is Groovy
  * A newer language that runs on the JVM
  * A dynamic language (delays more to runtime)
  * Eliminates unnecessary conventions
  * Fully compatible with using Java classes
  * Small learning curve

### Basic Hello Associates Comparison
Java code has a lot of rules and syntax that may not always be needed from a specification standpoint in order to accomplish our goals.  For instance, why do we need so many of the following when we code?
  * Semi-colons
  * Parenthesis
  * Type declarations
  * Visibility modifiers

Compare the following examples that print **Hello Associates** to the screen in both languages.
### Java Implementation of Hello Associate
```
public class Example {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
	System.out.println("Hello Associates!");
  }
}
```

### Groovy Implementation of Hello Associate
```
  println "Hello Associates!"
```

### Transfer/Data Object Comparison
Groovy provides a number of mechanisms to assist in making your code more readable.  A few of these are as follows.
  * Use def in declarations
  * Automatic constructor creation
  * Make it immutable with a word
  * Automatic getters and setters
  * Worry no more about == or .equals()

Please feel free to look at the following application code that creates three objects and prints a comparison of the objects.  The Groovy implementation definitely has some benefits of enabling a servicing developer to troubleshoot fewer lines of code if a problem is to be found.

### Java Implementation of a Transfer Object
```
public class AllowedValue {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		AllowedValueTO firstTO = new AllowedValueTO("12", "Auto");
		AllowedValueTO secondTO = new AllowedValueTO("12", "Auto");
		AllowedValueTO thirdTO = new AllowedValueTO("13", "Auto ");
		System.out.println(firstTO.equals(secondTO));
		System.out.println(firstTO.equals(thirdTO));
	}
}

class AllowedValueTO {
	private String key;
	private String value;

	public AllowedValueTO(String key, String value) {
		this.key = key;
		this.value = value;
	}

	public String getKey() {
		return key;
	}

	public String getValue() {
		return value;
	}
}
```

### Groovy Implementation of a Transfer Object
```
firstTO = new AllowedValueTO("12","Auto")
secondTO = new AllowedValueTO("12","Auto")
thirdTO = new AllowedValueTO("13","Auto ")
println firstTO == secondTO
println firstTO == thirdTO

@Immutable class AllowedValueTO {
	String key 
	String value
}
```

### A More Complex Code Example Comparison
Groovy can provide simplifications beyond defining simple objects, comparing them, and printing them.  Let's now look at an a collection of objects.

Groovy allows us to remove much of the noise found in Java and other languages.  For example, one can do the following in Groovy.
  * Use the << operator to replace add
  * Instantiate list with [ ]
  * Removing imports: java.io, java.lang, java.net, java.util, etc.
  * Delegate instead of redefining: @Delegate List clientIds = []
  * Why say return?

### Java Implementation of a Client List
```
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.List;

public class ClientList {
	
	private List<String> clientIds;
	
	public ClientList() {
		clientIds = new ArrayList<String>();
	}
	
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		ClientList cList = new ClientList();
		cList.add("CLIENT_ID_1");
  		cList.add("CLIENT_ID_2");
         System.out.print(" "+cList.clientIds.getClass()+" : ");
		System.out.println(cList.toString());
	}
	
	public boolean add(Object obj) {
		return clientIds.add((String)obj);
	}
	
	public String toString() {
		return ""+clientIds.getClass() + " : "+clientIds.toString();
	}
}
```

### Groovy Implementation of a Client List
```
class ClientList {
	@Delegate List clientIds = []
	
	static main(args) {
		def cList = new ClientList();
		cList.add "CLIENT_ID_1"
		cList.add "CLIENT_ID_2"
		println ""+cList.clientIds.class +" : "+cList
	}
}
```

### Additional Groovy Features
Groovy also provides the following nifty features!
  * Closures
  * Built-in XML generation
  * Three parenthesis construct for multi-line Strings
  * $ operator to use variables in Strings
  * Fancy foreach - 5.times {println "$it: "}

====Additional Resources====
For more information, please feel free to consult any of the following resources.
  * [[http://groovy.codehaus.org|Groovy on the Web]]
  * [[http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/java/library/j-pg08259.html|Groovy and Delegates]]	
  * [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Groovy_%28programming_language%29|Groovy on Wikipedia]]	
  * [[http://groovy.codehaus.org/Eclipse+Plugin|Groovy Eclipse Plug-In]]			
		